This is the continuation of the code challenge we started in the previous video.
Exercise five is not so difficult in terms of writing new code, so you can spend your time thinking
about what the results mean, how we set up the analysis, what might be other ways to implement this
analysis?
The goal here is simple.
Just find that best predicting neuron that you identified in the previous exercise and create a heat
map with its activations.
Now for this visualization I used a smaller context window just so we don't have to see all 90 tokens
preceding each target token.
So here in each line you see for example, not not not not not there's a lot of not nor here.
These are all the target tokens wouldn't uh and so on.
And as you know from other videos, I just arbitrarily set the color here to be 0.1 for all of these
tokens, so that you can experience the joy of discovering what the actual results look like when you
code this up yourself.
And as you are considering the results, I would like you to think about how we set up the analysis,
what the logistic regression really identifies, and if you have any ideas for how you might change
the analysis or do something differently.
If you were doing this code challenge, for example, as like a four month long research project.
Okay.
So now you can pause the video and get to work.
And now I will discuss my solution and my thoughts.
Here I am grabbing the negation activations from the maximum beta neuron.
In fact, I already calculated this variable above, but here it is again anyway.
Okay, and here I'm just a min max scaling this neurons activation so that we can use it as an index
into the colour map.
This code here you've seen before.
This is just identifying the width of a letter in Monospace.
And yeah there's not much I can show here that's new.
The main thing that's different that you haven't seen before is just this for loop here.
So instead of looping over all of the tokens in each batch, I'm just looping over from the preceding
five.
So this was 90.
We have the preceding context of 90.
And then we have the target token.
So now I'm just going to show a handful of tokens before instead of showing all of them.
That would just make a really long line.
And then I'm also just showing the first 20 batches in the sequence.
Okay.
So here we see what this looks like.
So this looks pretty nice.
What we are looking for here again is uh, the words uh not and contractions.
So we do see that there are more active or relatively strong activations for not not not not neither
not this one also shows pretty similar level of activation for enough compared to neither and not pretty
interesting.
This one is also interesting because we see strong activations for the apostrophe t compared to the
couldn't uh without the apostrophe t.
Uh, yeah.
So overall, I think this looks fairly compelling, but we do also see very strong activations for tokens
that are not really related to negation, like rusty and dead at the end of corroded.
Although I suppose corroded does have kind of a negative connotation.
Out is not really a negation term, although again, you know, pass out maybe does have some negative
connotation.
So it looks like we do get some specificity for the tokens that we are looking for, but we also get
some activations for other tokens as well.
One thing to keep in mind is that we did not select for neurons that show strong activations to negation
words, and low activations to all the other tokens.
In fact, the analysis has nothing to do with the tokens like evidence and Commissioner, these tokens
never entered the analysis.
The logistic regression.
The logistic regression only had two sets of tokens the negation tokens and the affirmation tokens.
Now, I'm not plotting here all or any of the affirmation tokens.
If you would like, you can do that.
That could be interesting to look through the affirmation tokens for this same neuron, and maybe you
would want to print those out using blue color map instead of red color map.
Now for the final exercise.
In this code challenge, take the code that you wrote for exercise five and embed it in a for loop over
all the layers.
As you're going through each layer, there are several statistical quantities that you want to extract.
First is the percent of neurons that have a statistically significant beta coefficient.
So you'll need to get and store the p value from each test on each neuron.
And as I've discussed in previous videos, you should also use a corrected p value threshold by correcting
for the number of neurons in each layer.
You can do it simply through Bonferroni correction if you that is, dividing by the number of neurons.
That's what I do in my solution.
If you are more comfortable with statistics, you can also do something like FDR correction.
Next, you also want to calculate the prediction accuracy from all of the neurons.
And when you're finished your for loop you can generate two scatter plots that will look like this.
In both cases, the x axis is the layer or the transformer block.
And remember that zero is the first layer after the embeddings, and 36 is the final transformer block
before the embeddings.
And what I'm plotting over here on the left is the percent of significant logistic regressions in each
layer.
So this is the number of neurons that had a beta coefficient with a corresponding p value below the
significance threshold.
You can see from the y axis that this is going to range from around 25 to 70.
And the question is whether it's just kind of randomly scattered or whether the significance count goes
up or down, or maybe some other kind of nonlinear pattern as a function of the layer.
So this plot on the left is just about how many neurons have any beta coefficient that is statistically
significant.
And then over here on the right I have actually two scatter plots in the same axis.
Both of them show the prediction accuracy.
And there are red dots to show the results for all of the neurons.
So the prediction accuracy average over 5000 neurons in each layer.
And the green squares show only the neurons that had a significant positive beta coefficient.
So that means that this is averaging over the neurons if the beta coefficient was positive, and also
if the p value was less than the threshold.
And again, it will be interesting to see what kinds of patterns there are across the layers, if there
are any patterns at all.
Now here's a little tip when averaging the accuracies for only a subset of neurons where the beta values
were positive and significant, you can use the numpy function numpy dot dot where the ma here is for
masked array.
I'm sure this is not the only way to do this selection, but I found this function pretty useful and
perhaps you will too.
Okay, so please now pause the video and enjoy wrapping up this code challenge.
And now I will show my solution and discuss my results.
A lot of the code here, at least in this first code cell, is code you've seen before in exercise five.
Here I am initializing three matrices of p values, beta values and accuracies.
Average accuracies.
These two I'm initializing to be zeros and the p values I'm initializing to be ones.
And the reason for this is that if the logistic regression model doesn't work well, if it crashes,
uh, or yeah, it just doesn't give a good solution, then I actually want the p value to be initialized
as a one, so that I can ignore it in the selection procedure in the in the visualization after this
loop.
Right.
So here I'm looping over all of the layers in the model.
And then within each layer I loop over all of the neurons, grab their activations, build the model,
and all of this code you have seen before.
This code is new.
This line of code is kind of new.
I mean, you've seen this code before.
This just wasn't inside the loop over neurons.
So now I'm calculating the accuracy for each neuron.
This gets the accuracy for each neuron and each token.
And then I average those together.
This gives me a proportion with the mean.
And then I'm multiplying it by 100 just to scale up to percent.
This code takes several minutes.
And so I'm printing out just some update information here as it goes through each layer here in this
cell is where I do the visualization.
So here I'm creating masks to identify, uh, the beta values that have significant p values.
So that is here the p value mask.
Where are the p values less than 0.05 divided by the number of neurons.
So this is Bonferroni correcting within each layer.
It's an extremely strict p value threshold by the way because this is 5120.
So the p value needs to be really, really small.
The effect needs to be really significant for it to show up here.
And then here is for the positive betas.
That one's a little bit simpler.
Now I find this somewhat confusing that in this numpy function for masked array the mask actually gets
flipped.
So it masks out where something is true and it preserves where something is false.
I don't know what you think, but in my opinion, that is totally opposite of the way that I think about
masks.
So if you define the masks to be the thing that you're looking for, the qualities that you are looking
for in a matrix or vector, then you actually need to invert that mask in order for it to apply in such
a way that you actually get the values that you are looking for that fit into this mask.
Okay.
So that is that's for that.
And then here I'm plotting.
Here's the average of the p value mask over uh axis one which is the layer axis.
Oh sorry.
This is the neuron axis.
So we're averaging over all the neurons within each layer.
And that's how I get the average accuracy.
And then or the average number of neurons that showed a significant result.
And then I multiply that by 100.
Again that's just a scale up to percent.
And then over here I'm averaging accuracy and masked accuracy, which is just the accuracy where the
p value was significant and the beta value was positive.
So here is what that result looks like.
And we see in all of these cases, the number or the percent of significant neurons that showed a significant,
uh, Logistic regression decreased pretty steeply by a factor of two, from 70 or even over two from
almost 70%.
So in the early layers of this transformer, almost 70% like two thirds of the neurons, showed a significant
difference in activation between negation and affirmation token words.
And then by the end, it drops down to less than a third, maybe a little bit over a quarter of the
neurons.
Now, that's still a pretty significant percentage.
That's around 1000 neurons out of 5000.
That still shows some kind of statistically significant difference in activation between the category
of negation words and the category of affirmation words, at least in this book.
But it is certainly quite a bit lower.
As for the prediction accuracy, we see that on average.
So this is not the best performing neuron.
It's also not the worst performing neuron.
This is the average of all of the neurons and also all the significant positive neurons.
The prediction accuracy was fairly high, again going up to almost 80%, close to 75% in the early layers
and going down to 65% around two thirds prediction accuracy later on.
Now the chance level performance here would be 50%.
So numbers above around 50 or maybe a little bit over 50, uh, are indicating some pretty decent predictability.
Now, the reason why the, uh, all of the tests here, the red dots is lower.
That's pretty trivial because here I'm also including into the average these neurons where there was
significant prediction, and also, uh, neurons that were not statistically significant.
And so their prediction accuracy, we would expect to be somewhere around 50%.
So in fact, this is not really a terribly useful thing to show.
But I think it's nice.
Anyway, just as a way to practice your coding skills and, uh, working with masked matrices.
Now, why is this the case?
I just want to say one quick word about interpreting this effect.
Remember that as these token embeddings vectors pass through the model, they go from one transformer
block to the next.
What's happening inside each transformer block?
As we get a little bit of a modification to the vector from the attention and from the MLP sublayers,
is that the model shifts from transforming the current token to making a prediction about the next token.
So in the beginning of the model, the transformer is really like thinking a lot about this token.
The token not and can't and isn't and shouldn't.
And the later you get into the model, the more the model is not processing that token in particular,
but thinking about what the next token should be based on this token and all the tokens that preceded
it.
Just as a meta comment here, we're not even finished the first mech Interp section, and I think you're
already starting to see that this kind of research is challenging for many reasons, including the complexity
of the models and the complexity of language.
Human written language.
On the other hand, I actually enjoy that challenge, that difficulty, and I hope that you are also
enjoying it.
This complexity also means that it's difficult to blindly trust the outcome of any random statistical
analysis, in terms of just looking at how many parameter estimates have a small p value.
You really need to check the results carefully to make sure that any interpretation you make is valid,
correct, and consistent with what the data are really showing.
And just to be clear, as long as you don't have any coding bugs, the statistics themselves are never
wrong.
Statistics is just math, and the math doesn't do things right or wrong.
But the way that someone uses a particular statistical analysis may not reveal exactly the results that
they are looking for.
And that is the tricky part.
Anyway, I'm sure that you put in a lot of work and effort into this code challenge, and the good news
is that all of that work will pay off in the next code challenge, where we will basically just adapt
this code to look at the attention sublayer.